Update to syntax breakdown - PR for comments only (#262)
ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base: draft-ietf-jsonpath-base.md

  E000 to 10FFFF. JSON values of type string are sequences of Unicode scalar values.

Singular Path:

> : A JSONPath expression built from appenders which each select at most one node.

Author: This sentence demonstrates a weakness in the "appender"/"selector" terminology. In plain English, it is more natural to talk about selectors selecting and appenders appending.

Reviewer: appender is placeholder terminology.

But to the point: Just because an oven bakes, we don't have to call it a baker.

Author: > appender is placeholder terminology.

Hmmm. It looks concrete to me. Perhaps we should bring back some of the placeholders until we can think of better terms.

> 
> But to the point: Just because an oven bakes, we don't have to call it a baker.

Sure, but if we choose a term like baker, it's hard to avoid all baking connotations. In the current draft, we have selectors which select and that terminology is easy to understand and use. We need something similarly readable for these new terms.

Selector:
: A single item within a bracketed (`[]`) child appender that matches the values which

>   are to be selected.

Author: * This definition positions a selector as something which _matches_, leaving _selecting_ to the child appender. That division is not consistent with the rest of the document.

* Selectors also appear with descendant appenders.

* "the values" is a bit vague. I think we need to say that a selector selects zero or more children of a given value.

Reviewer 2: This definition could point us to a way out of the weakness in the "appender"/"selector" terminology, Glyn was mentioning.

If we re-rename "selector" to what it has been before and call "selector items" (or "items" in short) those items inside the brackets, above definition reads:

```
Item:
: A single item within a bracketed (`[]`) child selector that matches the values which
  are to be selected.
```
Use of `selector`/ `selector-item` would also relax the need of strict differentiating "selecting" / "matching" terminology (which is useful though).

Within the JSONPath expression, the abstract name `$` is used to refer
to the *root node* of the argument, i.e., to the argument as a whole.

JSONPath expressions primarily use the *bracket notation*

~~~~
$['store']['book'][0]['title']
~~~~

but may also use the shorthand *dot notation*

~~~~
$.store.book[0].title
~~~~

to build paths that are input to a JSONPath implementation.

> Generally, the dot notation is preferred for most applications.

Author: I'm not sure why we are expressing such a preference. It would be helpful to explain why this is the case.

Mixing these syntaxes within a single path is also useful.

JSONPath allows the wildcard symbol `*` to select any member of an
object or any element of an array ({{wildcard}}).

> The descendant appender (which starts with `..`) recursively selects some or all of the descendants ({{descendant-appender}}) of a node.

Author: It is sufficient to talk about selecting descendants: "recursively" adds no value.

Reviewer 2: Yes, better remove "recursively".

{{tbl-overview}} provides a quick overview of the JSONPath syntax elements.

| JSONPath            | Description                                                                                                             |
|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `$`                 | [root node identifier](#root-identifier)                                                                                |
| `[<selectors>]`     | [child appender](#child-appender) selects zero or more children of JSON objects and arrays; contains one or more selectors, separated by commas        |

> | `..[<selectors>]`   | [descendant child appender](#descendant-appender): recursive version of the child appender                             |

Author: "descendant appender" is sufficient - no  need to mention "child".

A description more consistent with that of the child appender would be: "selects zero or more descendants of JSON objects and arrays; contains one or more selectors, separated by commas"

> | `*`                 | [wildcard selector](#name-selector): selects all children of an array or object                                         |

Author: Does it select or match?

| `'name'`            | [name selector](#name-selector): selects a named child of an object                                                     |
| `3`                 | [index selector](#index-selector): selects an indexed child of an array (from 0)                                        |
| `0:100:5`           | [array slice selector](#slice): start:end:step for arrays                                                               |
| `?<expr>`           | [filter selector](#filter-selector): selects particular children using a boolean expression                             |

> | `@`                 | [current node appender](#filter-selector) (valid only within filter selectors)                                          |

Author: `@` is a *starter. For consistency with `$`, it would be better to describe it as a "current node identifier".

-json}}, at the time of writing is generally considered to be overtaken
by events and causes no issues with the present specification.)

Specifically, the "Semantics" subsections of Sections
{{<name-selector}}, {{<wildcard}},
{{<filter-selector}}, and {{<descendant-appender}} describe behavior that
turns unpredictable when the JSON value for one of the objects
under consideration was constructed out of JSON text that exhibits
multiple members for a single object that share the same member name
("duplicate names", see {{Section 4 of -json}}).

> Also, matching ({{appenders}}) and comparing

Author: Isn't matching what selectors do, rather than something appenders do?

({{comparisons}} in Section {{<filter-selector}}) of strings assumes these
strings are sequences of Unicode scalar values, turning unpredictable
if they aren't ({{Section 8.2 of -json}}).

## Syntax

> Syntactically, a JSONPath query consists of a root starter (`$`), which

Author: This is called a "root identifier" elsewhere.

stands for a nodelist that contains the root node of the argument,
followed by a possibly empty sequence of *appenders*.

~~~~ abnf
json-path = root-identifier *(S (child-appender               /

>                                  descendant-child-appender))

Author: `descendant-appender` is sufficient IMO.

The semantics are that a valid query is executed against a value,
the *argument*, and produces a list of zero or more nodes of the value.

> The query is a sequence of zero or more *appenders*, each of

Author: Queries start with a root identifier rather than an appender.

which is applied to the result of the previous appender and provides
input to the next appender.
These results and inputs take the form of a *nodelist*, i.e., a
sequence of zero or more nodes.

> The nodelist presented to the first appender contains a single node,

Author: This needs to talk about the root identifier rather than the first appender.

the argument.
The nodelist resulting from the last appender is presented as the
result of the query; depending on the specific API, it might be
presented as an array of the JSON values at the nodes, an array of
Normalized Paths referencing the nodes, or both — or some other
representation as desired by the implementation.
Note that the API must be capable of presenting an empty nodelist as
the result of the query.

> A appender performs its function on each of the nodes in its input

Author: An appender...

nodelist, during such a function execution, such a node is referred to
as the "current node".  Each of these function executions produces a
nodelist, which are then concatenated to produce
the result of the appender. A node may be selected more than once and
appear that number of times in the nodelist. Duplicate nodes are not removed.

> The processing within a appender may execute nested queries,

Author: an appender

query `$.a[*].b` selects the following list of nodes: `0`, `1`
(denoted here by their value).

The query consists of `$` followed by three appenders: `.a`, `[*]`, and `.b`.

> Firstly, `$` selects the root node which is the argument.

Author: Talking of `$` as if it was a selector doesn't seem consistent with "root identifier" language.

This is the concatenation of three lists, two of length one containing
`0`, `1`, respectively, and one of length zero.

<!--
Greg: this could be reworded since appenders don't select.  Maybe they do

> vicariously through selectors.

Author: Agreed. The PR needs to use consistent terms throughout.

| Query | Result | Result Path | Comment |
| :---: | ------ | :----------: | ------- |
| `$` | `{"k": "v"}` | `$` | Root node |
{: title="Root identifier examples"}

## Selectors

> Selectors are defined solely within the context of the [child appender](#child-appender).

Author: * I find the notion of selectors being _defined_ in the context of the child appender confusing. They need to be defined here and then referenced by the child appender.

* Selectors are used in descendant appenders too.

> A selector outside of a child appender is invalid.

Author: This statement seems unnecessary. Why would anyone dream of constructing a query with a selector outside of a child (or descendant) appender? The ABNF does not allow it.

A selector identifies, or matches, child elements to be selected for the

> resulting nodelist.

Author: This is confusing. We should reserve identification language for `$` (and perhaps `@`). I think the rest of the PR suggests that selectors match rather than select and it's the child/descendant appender that actually does the selecting.

| \\uXXXX            | U+XXXX              | unicode character           |
{: title="Escape Sequence Replacements" cols="c c"}

The name selector applied to an object
matches the node of the corresponding member value from it, if and only if that object has a member with that name.

> Nothing is selected from a value that is not a object.

Author: "Nothing is matched..."?

| :---: | ------ | :----------: | ------- |
| `$.o['j j']['k.k']`   | `3` | `$['o']['j j']['k.k']`      | Named value in nested object      |
| `$.o["j j"]["k.k"]`   | `3` | `$['o']['j j']['k.k']`      | Named value in nested object      |
| `$["'"]["@"]` | `2` | `$['\'']['@']` | Unusual member names
| `$.j`   | `{"k": 3}` | `$['j']`      | Named value of an object      |
| `$.j.k` | `3`        | `$['j']['k']` | Named value in nested object  |
{: title="Name selector examples"}

### Wildcard Selector {#wildcard}

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The wildcard selector has either the form `[*]` or the shorthand form `.*`.

~~~~ abnf
wildcard             = "*"
~~~~

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

> A `wildcard` selects the nodes of all children of an object or array.

Author: "matches"

Applying the `wildcard` to a primitive JSON value (that is,

> a number, a string, `true`, `false`, or `null`) selects no node.

Author: "matches no node"

| :---: | ------ | :----------: | ------- |
| `$[*]`   | `{"j": 1, "k": 2}` <br> `[5, 3]` | `$['o']` <br> `$['a']` | Object values      |
| `$.o[*]` | `1` <br> `2` | `$['o']['j']` <br> `$['o']['k']` | Object values      |
| `$.o[*]` | `2` <br> `1` | `$['o']['k']` <br> `$['o']['j']` | Alternative result |
| `$.a[*]` | `5` <br> `3` | `$['a'][0]` <br> `$['a'][1]`     | Array members      |
{: title="Index wildcard appender examples"}

### Index selector {#index-selector}

#### Syntax {#syntax-index}
{: unnumbered}

An index selector `<index>` matches at most one array element value.

~~~~ abnf
index-selector  = int                             ; decimal integer

int             = ["-"] ( "0" / (DIGIT1 *DIGIT) ) ; -  optional
DIGIT1          = %x31-39                         ; 1-9 non-zero digit
~~~~

Applying the numerical `index-selector` is required to select the corresponding
element. JSONPath allows it to be negative (see {{index-semantics}}).

Notes:
1. An `index-selector` is an integer (in base 10, as in JSON numbers).
2. As in JSON numbers, the syntax does not allow octal-like integers with leading zeros such as `01` or `-01`.

#### Semantics {#index-semantics}
{: unnumbered}

> The `index-selector` applied to an array selects an array element using a zero-based index.

Author: "matches"

For example, the selector `0` selects the first and the selector `4` the fifth element of a sufficiently long array.
Nothing is selected, and it is not an error, if the index lies outside the range of the array. Nothing is selected from a value that is not an array.

A negative `index-selector` counts from the array end.
For example, the selector `-1` selects the last and the selector `-2` selects the penultimate element of an array with at least two elements.
As with non-negative indexes, it is not an error if such an element does
not exist; this simply means that no element is selected.

#### Examples
{: unnumbered}

<!-- EDITING NOTE: There are non-breaking spaces here between j and j -->
<!-- i.e., j j and not j j -->

JSON:

    {
      "o": {"j j": {"k.k": 3}},
      "a": ["a","b"],
      "'": {"@": 2}

>     }

Author: The JSON can be stripped back to `["a","b"]` and the examples simplified to `$[1]` and `$[-2]`.

Array indexing is a way of selecting a particular element of an array using
a 0-based index.

> For example, the expression `0` selects the first element of a non-empty array.

Author: "matches" (same comment elsewhere in this section)

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

The filter selector works with arrays and objects exclusively. Its result is a list of *zero*, *one*, *multiple* or *all* of their array elements or member values, respectively.

> Applied to other value types, it will select nothing.

Author: "match"

| `$[?(@ == @)]` | | | Comparison of structured values |
{: title="Filter selector examples"}

## Appenders

A JSONPath query consists of root identifier followed by a sequence of appenders.
Valid appenders are

  * Child appender `[<selectors>]`, where `<selectors>` is one or more of
    several selector types, which match the nodes to select,
    separated by commas
  * Descendant child appender `..[<selectors>]`

The descendant child appender is a child appender that has been made to

> recursively select values within nested objects and arrays by prepending it with `..`.

Author: It can also select values which are children of the input value, not just those which appear within objects and arrays nested in the input value.

### Child Appender

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The child appender has the form `[<selectors>]` where `<selectors>` is a comma-delimited
collection of one or more selectors.

> Each selector is defined below.

Author: This sentence is confusing given that selectors were defined above.

~~~~ abnf
child-appender = "[" S selector 1*(S "," S selector) S "]"

selector       =  ( name-selector /
                    index-selector      /
                    slice-selector /
                    filter-selector
                  )
~~~~

Shorthand notations exist for child appenders with either:

* a single element that is a `wildcard`, as `wild-selector-shorthand`
* a single element that is a `name-selector`, as `name-selector-shorthand`.

This shorthand entirely replaces the bracketed syntax.
For example, `['child']` and `.child` are equivalent as appenders,
as are `[*]` and `.*`.

A `name-selector-shorthand` starts with a dot `.` followed by an object member's name.

~~~~ abnf
wild-selector-shorthand     = "." wildcard

> name-selector-shorthand    = "." dot-member-name

Author: The above productions are orphans. They need to be referenced in the rest of the ABNF.

dot-member-name       = name-first *name-char
name-first            =
                           ALPHA /
                           "_"   /            ; _
                           %x80-10FFFF        ; any non-ASCII Unicode character
name-char = DIGIT / name-first

DIGIT                 =  %x30-39              ; 0-9
ALPHA                 =  %x41-5A / %x61-7A    ; A-Z / a-z
~~~~

Member names containing characters other than allowed by
`name-selector-shorthand` — such as space (U+0020), minus (U+002D), dot (U+002E)
or escaped characters which appear in the [name selector semantics section](#name-semantics) —
MUST NOT be used with the `name-selector-shorthand`.
(Such member names can be addressed by the `name-selector` syntax instead.)

A `name-selector-shorthand` string is converted to a member name by removing
the initial dot.

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

A child appender operates on objects and arrays only.
It contains a comma-delimited collection of selectors to indicate which

> object members and array elements to selects.

Author: "select"

selectors of different types may be combined within a single child appender.

A child appender iterates over its input nodelist and presents each node to each selector.
The selector then identifies which of that node's children are to be included in the resulting nodelist.

The resulting nodelist of a child appender is the concatenation of
the nodelists from each of its selectors in the order that the selectors
appear in the list.
Note that any node matched by more than one selector is kept
as many times in the nodelist.

### Descendant appender

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The descendant appender starts with a double dot `..`

> followed by either a child appender (`descendant-child-appender`).

Author: strike "either"

> followed by either a child appender (`descendant-child-appender`).

Author: ```suggestion
and is followed by a child appender (`descendant-child-appender`).
```

~~~~ abnf
descendant-child-appender   = (descendant-child /
                               descendant-name-shorthand)
descendant-child            = ".." child-appender

descendant-name-shorthand   = ".." dot-member-name
descendant-wild-shorthand   = ".." wildcard
~~~~

The shorthand notations exist for the occasion when a
descendant child appender is used with either

* a single name selector where the name can be used in its shorthand notation
* a single wildcard selector

The shorthand is not valid for child appenders containing more than one selector
other selector types, or name selectors that cannot themselves be represented

> in shorthand.

Author: The above sentence is hard to parse.

> Note that `..` on its own is not valid.

Author: Better to say it isn't a valid appender.
